---
title: "Plan for Unicode support"
date: 2012-09-22 
author: Nenad Rakocevic 
category: update
hero_type: image
hero_src: https://images.pexels.com/photos/993019/pexels-photo-993019.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&h=650&w=940
---

Red is growing up fast, even if just born two weeks ago! It is time we implement basic string support so we can do our first, real, hello-word. ;-)

Red strings will natively support Unicode. In order to achieve that in an efficient and cross-platform way, we need a good plan. Here is the list of Unicode native formats used by our main target platforms API:

        Windows       : UTF-16
        Linux         : UTF-8
        MacOSX/Cocoa  : UTF-16
        MacOSX/Darwin : UTF-8
        Java          : UTF-16
        .Net          : UTF-16
        Javascript    : UTF-8
        Syllable      : UTF-8
   
All these formats are variable-width encodings, requiring any indexed access to pay the cost of walking through the string.

Fortunately, there are also fixed-width Unicode encodings that can be used to give us back constant time for indexed accesses. So, in order to make it the most space-efficient, Red strings will internally support only these encoding formats:

        Latin-1 (1 byte/codepoint)
        UCS-2   (2 bytes/codepoint)
        UCS-4   (4 bytes/codepoint)

This is not something new, at least Python 3.3 does it in the [same way](http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0393/).

Additionally, UTF-8 and UTF-16 codecs will be supported, in order to deal with I/O accesses on host platforms.

Red will use UTF-8 for exchanging strings with outer world by default, except when accessing a UTF-16 API is necessary. Conversion for input and output strings will be done on-the-fly between one of the internal representation and UTF-8/UTF-16. When reading an input string, Red will select the most space-efficient internal format depending on highest codepoint in the input string. Also users should be able to force the encoding of a string to a given internal format, when possible.

So far, this is the plan for additing Unicode to Red, a prototype implementation will be done quickly, so we can fine-tune it if required.

Comments and suggestions are welcome.